--- PAGE 1 ---
This paper is included in the Proceedings of the  
15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems  
Design and Implementation.
July 14–16, 2021
978-1-939133-22-9 
Open access to the Proceedings of the 
15th USENIX Symposium on Operating 
Systems Design and Implementation 
is sponsored by USENIX.
Beyond malloc efficiency to fleet efficiency: 
a hugepage-aware memory allocator
A.H. Hunter, Jane Street Capital; Chris Kennelly, Paul Turner, Darryl Gove,  
Tipp Moseley, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Google
https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi21/presentation/hunter

--- PAGE 2 ---
Beyond malloc efﬁciency to ﬂeet efﬁciency: a hugepage-aware memory allocator
A.H. Hunter
Jane Street Capital∗
Chris Kennelly
Google
Paul Turner
Google
Darryl Gove
Google
Tipp Moseley
Google
Parthasarathy Ranganathan
Google
Abstract
Memory allocation represents signiﬁcant compute cost at
the warehouse scale and its optimization can yield consid-
erable cost savings. One classical approach is to increase
the efﬁciency of an allocator to minimize the cycles spent in
the allocator code. However, memory allocation decisions
also impact overall application performance via data place-
ment, offering opportunities to improve ﬂeetwide productivity
by completing more units of application work using fewer
hardware resources. Here, we focus on hugepage coverage.
We present T
EMERAIRE , a hugepage-aware enhancement
of TCM ALLOC to reduce CPU overheads in the applica-
tion’s code. We discuss the design and implementation of
TEMERAIRE including strategies for hugepage-aware mem-
ory layouts to maximize hugepage coverage and to minimize
fragmentation overheads. We present application studies for
8 applications, improving requests-per-second (RPS) by 7.7%
and reducing RAM usage 2.4%. We present the results of
a 1% experiment at ﬂeet scale as well as the longitudinal
rollout in Google’s warehouse scale computers. This yielded
6% fewer TLB miss stalls, and 26% reduction in memory
wasted due to fragmentation. We conclude with a discussion
of additional techniques for improving the allocator develop-
ment process and potential optimization strategies for future
memory allocators.
1 Introduction
The datacenter tax [23, 41] within a warehouse-scale com-
puter (WSC) is the cumulative time spent on common service
overheads, such as serialization, RPC communication, com-
pression, copying, and memory allocation. WSC workload
diversity [
23] means that we typically cannot optimize sin-
gle application(s) to strongly improve total system efﬁciency,
as costs are borne across many independent workloads. In
contrast, focusing on the components of datacenter tax can
realize substantial performance and efﬁciency improvements
∗Work performed while at Google.
in aggregate as the beneﬁts can apply to entire classes of appli-
cation. Over the past several years, our group has focused on
minimizing the cost of memory allocation decisions, to great
effect; realizing whole system gains by dramatically reducing
the time spent in memory allocation. But it is not only the cost
of these components we can optimize. Signiﬁcant beneﬁt can
also be realized by improving the efﬁciency of application
code by changing the allocator. In this paper, we consider
how to optimize application performance by improving the
hugepage coverage provided by memory allocators.
Cache and Translation Lookaside Buffer (TLB) misses are
a dominant performance overhead on modern systems. In
WSCs, the memory wall [ 44] is signiﬁcant: 50% of cycles are
stalled on memory in one analysis [ 23]. Our own workload
proﬁling observed approximately 20% of cycles stalled on
TLB misses.
Hugepages are a processor feature that can signiﬁcantly
reduce the number, and thereby the cost, of TLB misses [ 26].
The increased size of a hugepage enables the same number of
TLB entries to map a substantially larger range of memory.
On the systems under study, hugepages also allow the total
stall time for a miss+ﬁll to be reduced as their page-table
representation requires one fewer level to traverse.
While an allocator cannot modify the amount of memory
that user code accesses, or even the pattern of accesses to
objects, it can cooperate with the operating system and con-
trol the placement of new allocations. By optimizing huge-
page coverage, an allocator may reduce TLB misses. Memory
placement decisions in languages such as C and C++ must
also deal with the consequence that their decisions are ﬁnal:
Objects cannot be moved once allocated [ 11]. Allocation
placement decisions can only be optimized at the point of
allocation. This approach ran counter to our prior work in
this space, as we can potentially increase the CPU cost of an
allocation, increasing the datacenter tax, but make up for it
by reducing processor stalls elsewhere. This improves appli-
cation metrics1 such as requests-per-second (RPS).
1While reducing stalls can improve IPC, IPC alone is a poor proxy [ 3] for
how much useful application work we can accomplish with a ﬁxed amount
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    257

--- PAGE 3 ---
Our contributions are as follows:
• The design of T EMERAIRE , a hugepage-aware enhance-
ment of TCM ALLOC to reduce CPU overheads in the
rest of the application’s code. We present strategies for
hugepage-aware memory layouts to maximize hugepage
coverage and to minimize fragmentation overheads.
• An evaluation of T EMERAIRE in complex real-world ap-
plications and scale in WSCs. We measured a sample of
8 applications running within our infrastructure observed
requests-per-second (RPS) increased by 7.7% and RAM
usage decreased by 2.4%. Applying these techniques
to all applications within Google’s WSCs yielded 6%
fewer TLB miss stalls, and 26% reduction in memory
wasted due to fragmentation.
• Strategies for optimizing the development process of
memory allocator improvements, using a combination
of tracing, telemetry, and experimentation at warehouse-
scale.
2 The challenges of coordinating Hugepages
Virtual memory requires translating user space addresses to
physical addresses via caches known as Translation Looka-
side Buffers (TLBs) [ 7]. TLBs have a limited number of
entries, and for many applications, the entire TLB only covers
a small fraction of the total memory footprint using the default
page size. Modern processors increase this coverage by sup-
porting hugepages in their TLBs. An entire aligned hugepage
(2MiB is a typical size on x86) occupies just one TLB entry.
Hugepages reduce stalls by increasing the effective capacity
of the TLB and reducing TLB misses [ 5, 26].
Traditional allocators manage memory in page-sized
chunks. Transparent Huge Pages (THP) [ 4] provide an oppor-
tunity for the kernel to opportunistically cover consecutive
pages using hugepages in the page table. A memory allocator,
superﬁcially, need only allocate hugepage-aligned and -sized
memory blocks to take advantage of this support.
A memory allocator that releases memory back to the OS
(necessary at the warehouse scale where we have long running
workloads with dynamic duty cycles) has a much harder chal-
lenge. The return of non-hugepage aligned memory regions
requires that the kernel use smaller pages to represent what re-
mains, defeating the kernel’s ability to provide hugepages and
imposing a performance cost for the remaining used pages.
Alternatively, an allocator may wait for an entire hugepage
to become free before returning it to the OS. This preserves
hugepage coverage, but can contribute signiﬁcant ampliﬁca-
tion relative to true usage, leaving memory idle. DRAM is a
signiﬁcant cost the deployment of WSCs [ 27]. The manage-
ment of external fragmentation, unused space in blocks too
of hardware. A busy-looping spinlock has extremely high IPC, but does little
useful work under contention.
allocate. . .
free some. . .
used
 used
 used
 used
used
 used
Figure 1: Allocation and deallocation patterns leading to frag-
mentation
small to be used for requested allocations, by the allocator is
important in this process. For example consider the alloca-
tions in Figure
1. After this series of allocations there are 2
units of free space. The choice is to either use small pages,
which result in lower fragmentation but less efﬁcient use of
TLB entries, or hugepages, which are TLB-efﬁcient but have
high fragmentation.
A user-space allocator that is aware of the behavior pro-
duced by these policies can cooperate with their outcomes
by densely aligning the packing of allocations with hugepage
boundaries, favouring the use of allocated hugepages, and
(ideally) returning unused memory at the same alignment 2.
A hugepage-aware allocator helps with managing memory
contiguity at the user level. The goal is to maximally pack
allocations onto nearly-full hugepages, and conversely, to min-
imize the space used on empty (or emptier) hugepages, so that
they can be returned to the OS as complete hugepages. This
efﬁciently uses memory and interacts well with the kernel’s
transparent hugepage support. Additionally, more consistently
allocating and releasing hugepages forms a positive feedback
loop: reducing fragmentation at the kernel level and improv-
ing the likelihood that future allocations will be backed by
hugepages.
3 Overview of TCM ALLOC
TCM ALLOC is a memory allocator used in large-scale appli-
cations, commonly found in WSC settings. It shows robust
performance [21]. Our design builds directly on the structure
of TCM ALLOC .
Figure 2 shows the organization of memory in TCM ALLOC .
Objects are segregated by size. First, TCM ALLOC partitions
memory into spans, aligned to page size 3.
TCM ALLOC ’s structure is deﬁned by its answer to the
same two questions that drive any memory allocator.
1. How do we pick object sizes and organize metadata to
2This is important as the memory backing a hugepage must be physically
contiguous. By returning complete hugepages we can actually assist the
operating system in managing fragmentation.
3Confusingly, TCM ALLOC ’s “page size” parameter is not necessarily the
system page size. The default conﬁguration is to use an 8 KiB TCM ALLOC
“page”, which is two (small) virtual memory pages on x86.
258    15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association

--- PAGE 4 ---
requested from OS
2 MiB
200 KiB
25 KiB
Figure 2: Organization of memory in TCM ALLOC . System-
mapped memory is broken into (multi-)page spans, which are
sub-divided into objects of an assigned, ﬁxed sizeclass, here
25 KiB.
minimize space overhead and fragmentation?
2. How do we scalably support concurrent allocations?
Sufﬁciently large allocations are fulﬁlled with a span con-
taining only the allocated object. Other spans contain multiple
smaller objects of the same size (a sizeclass). The “small” ob-
ject size boundary is 256 KiB. Within this “small” threshold,
allocation requests are rounded up to one of 100 sizeclasses.
TCM ALLOC stores objects in a series of caches, illustrated in
OS
 pageheap
mmap
release
central
8 bytes
central
256KiBspans
spans
central
. . .
transfer
 transfer
transfer
. . .
CPU 0 cache
 CPU 9 cache
CPU. . .
malloc() free()
(large) malloc()
(large) free()
Figure 3: The organization of caches in TCM ALLOC ; we see
memory allocated from the OS to the pageheap, distributed
up into spans given to the central caches, to local caches. This
paper focuses on a new implementation for the pageheap.
Figure 3. Spans are allocated from a simple pageheap, which
keeps track of all unused pages and does best-ﬁt allocation.
The pageheap is also responsible for returning no-longer-
needed memory to the OS when possible. Rather than do-
ing this on the
free() path, a dedicated release-memory
method is invoked periodically, aiming to maintain a con-
ﬁgurable, steady rate of release in MB/s. This is a heuristic.
TCM ALLOC wants to simultaneously use the least memory
possible in steady-state, avoiding expensive system alloca-
tions that could be elided by using previously provisioned
memory. We discuss handling this peak-to-trough allocation
pattern in more detail in Section 4.3.
Ideally, TCM ALLOC would return all memory that user
code will not need soon. Memory demand varies unpre-
dictably, making it challenging to return memory that will
go unused while simultaneously retaining memory to avoid
syscalls and page faults.. Better decisions about memory re-
turn policies have high value and are discussed in section 7.
TCM ALLOC will ﬁrst attempt to serve allocations from a
“local” cache, like most modern allocators [ 9,12,20,39]. Orig-
inally these were the eponymous per- Thread Caches, storing
a list of free objects for each sizeclass. To reduce stranded
memory and improve re-use for highly threaded applications,
TCM ALLOC now uses a per-hyperthread local cache. When
the local cache has no objects of the appropriate sizeclass to
serve a request (or has too many after an attempt to free()),
requests route to a single central cache for that sizeclass. This
has two components–a small fast, mutex-protected transfer
cache (containing ﬂat arrays of objects from that sizeclass)
and a large, mutex-protected central freelist, containing every
span assigned to that sizeclass; objects can be fetched from,
or returned to these spans. When all objects from a span have
been returned to a span held in the central freelist, that span
is returned to the pageheap.
In our WSC, most allocations are small (50% of allocated
space is objects ≤ 8192 bytes), as depicted in Figure 4. These
are then aggregated into spans. The pageheap primarily al-
locates 1- or 2-page spans, as depicted in Figure
5. 80% of
spans are smaller than a hugepage.
The design of “stacked” caches make the system usefully
modular, and there are several concomitant advantages:
• Clean abstractions are easier to understand and test.
•
It’s reasonably direct to replace any one level of the
cache with a totally new implementation.
• When desired, cache implementations can be selected at
runtime, with beneﬁts to operational rollout and experi-
mentation.
TCM ALLOC ’s pageheap has a simple interface for manag-
ing memory.
• New(N) allocates a span of N pages
• Delete(S) returns a New’d span ( S) to the allocator.
• Release(N) gives >= N unused pages cached by the
page heap back to the OS
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    259

--- PAGE 5 ---
10
2
10
4
10
6
10
8
10
10
Allocated Size (bytes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion
Figure 4: CDF of allocation sizes from WSC applications,
weighted by bytes.
4 T EMERAIRE ’s approach
TEMERAIRE , this paper’s contribution to TCM ALLOC , re-
places the pageheap with a design that attempts to maximally
ﬁll (and empty) hugepages. The source code is on Github
(see Section 9). We developed heuristics that pack allocations
densely onto highly-used hugepages and simultaneously form
entirely unused hugepages for return to the OS.
We refer to several deﬁnitions. Slack is the gap between an
allocation’s requested size and the next whole hugepage. Vir-
tual address space allocated from the OS is unbacked without
reserving physical memory. On use, it is backed, mapped by
the OS with physical memory. We may release memory to
the OS once again making it unbacked. We primarily pack
within hugepage boundaries, but use regions of hugepages for
packing allocations across hugepage boundaries.
From our telemetry of malloc usage and TCM ALLOC
internals, and knowledge of the kernel implementation, we
developed several key principles that motivate T EMERAIRE ’s
choices.
1. Total memory demand varies unpredictably with
time, but not every allocation is released.
We have
no control over the calling code, and it may rapidly (and
repeatedly) modulate its usage; we must be hardened to
this. But many allocations on the pageheap are immortal
(and it is difﬁcult to predict which they are [ 30]); any
particular allocation might disappear instantly or live
forever, and we must deal well with both cases.
10
4
10
5
10
6
10
7
10
8
10
9
10
10
Span Size (bytes)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Proportion
Figure 5: CDF of TCM ALLOC span sizes from WSC appli-
cations, weighted by bytes.
2. Completely draining hugepages implies packing
memory at hugepage granularity
. Returning huge-
pages that aren’t nearly-empty to the OS is costly (see
section
2). Generating empty/nearly-empty hugepages
implies densely packing the other hugepages in our bi-
nary. Our design must enable densely packing alloca-
tions into as few, saturated, bins as possible.
While we aim to use exclusively hugepage-sized bins,
malloc must support allocation sizes larger than a sin-
gle hugepage. These can be allocated normally, but we
place smaller allocations into the slack of the allocation
to achieve high allocation density. Only when small al-
locations are dominated by slack do we need to place
large allocations end on end in regions.
3. Draining hugepages gives us new release decision
points.
When a hugepage becomes completely empty,
we can choose whether to retain it for future memory
allocations or return it to the OS. Retaining it until re-
leased by TCM
ALLOC ’s background thread carries a
higher memory cost. Returning it reduces memory us-
age, but comes at a cost of system calls and page faults
if reused. Adaptively making this decision allows us to
return memory to the OS faster than the background
thread while simultaneously avoiding extra system calls.
4. Mistakes are costly, but work is not. V ery few alloca-
tions directly touch the pageheap, but all allocations are
backed via the pageheap. We must only pay the cost of al-
location once; if we make a bad placement and fragment
260    15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association

--- PAGE 6 ---
a hugepage, we pay either that space or the time-cost
of breaking up a hugepage for a long time. It is worth
slowing down the allocator, if doing so lets it make better
decisions.
Our allocator implements its interface by delegating to
several subcomponents, mapped in Figure 6. Each component
is built with the above principles in mind, and each specializes
its approximation for the type of allocation it handles best. As
per principle #4, we emphasize smart placement over speed 4.
While the particular implementation of T EMERAIRE is
tied to TCM ALLOC internals, most modern allocators share
similar large backing allocations of page (or higher) granu-
larity, like TCM
ALLOC ’s spans: compare jemalloc’s “ex-
tents” [ 20], Hoard’s “superblocks” [ 9], and mimalloc’s
“pages” [ 29]. Hoard’s 8KB superblocks are directly allo-
cated with ‘mmap‘, preventing hugepage contiguity. Those
superblocks could instead be densely packed onto hugepages.
mimalloc places its 64KiB+ “pages” within “segments,” but
these are maintained per-thread which hampers dense pack-
ing across the segments of the process. Eagerly returning
pages to the OS minimizes the RAM cost here, but breaks
up hugepages. These allocators could also beneﬁt from a
TEMERAIRE -like hugepage aware allocator 5.
HugeAllocator
HugeCache
unbacked hugepages
HugeFiller
backed hugepages
small requests
(< 1 MiB)
large requests
(≥ 1 GiB)
medium requests
(1 MiB - 1 GiB)
HugeRegion
sometimes
Figure 6: T EMERAIRE ’s components. Arrows represent the
ﬂow of requests to interior components.
4.1 The overall algorithm
We will brieﬂy sketch the overall approach and each com-
ponent’s role, then describe each component in detail. Our
goal is to minimize generated slack, and if we do generate
slack, to reuse it for other allocations (as with any page-level
fragmentation.)
4As each operation holds an often-contended mutex, we do maintain
reasonable efﬁciency: most operations are O(1), with care taken to optimize
constant factors.
5Indeed, jemalloc is doing so, based on T EMERAIRE .
Span New(N) {
// Slack is too small to matter
if (N >= 1 GiB) return HugeCache.New(N);
// Help bin-pack a single hugepage
if (N <= 1 MiB) return HugeFiller.New(N);
if (N < 2 MiB) {
// If we can reuse empty space, do so
Span s = HugeFiller.TryAllocate(N);
if (s != NULL) return s;
}
// If we have a region, use it
Span s = HugeRegion.TryAllocate(N);
if (s != NULL) return s;
// We need a new hugepage.
s = HugeCache.New(N);
HugeFiller.DonateTail(s);
return s;
}
Figure 7: Allocation ﬂow for subcomponents. Hugepage size
is 2 MiB.
Behind all components is the HugeAllocator, which deals
with virtual memory and the OS. It provides other compo-
nents with unbacked memory that they can back and pass on.
We also maintain a cache of backed, fully-empty hugepages,
called the HugeCache.
We keep a list of partially ﬁlled single hugepages (the
HugeFiller) that can be densely ﬁlled by subsequent small
allocations. Where binpacking the allocations along hugepage
boundaries would be inefﬁcient, we implement a specialized
allocator (the HugeRegion).
TEMERAIRE directs allocation decisions to its subcompo-
nents based on request size with the algorithm in Figure 7.
Each subcomponent is optimized for different allocation sizes.
Allocations for an exact multiple of hugepage size, or those
sufﬁciently large that slack is immaterial, we forward directly
to the HugeCache.
Intermediate sized allocations (between 1MiB and 1GiB)
are typically also allocated from the HugeCache, with a ﬁnal
step of donation for slack. For example, a 4.5 MiB allocation
from the HugeCache produces 1.5 MiB of slack, an unaccept-
ably high overhead ratio. T EMERAIRE donates that slack to
the HugeFiller by pretending that the last hugepage of the
request has a single “leading” allocation on it (Figure 8).
When such a large span is deallocated, the allocator also
marks the ﬁctitious leading allocation as free. If the slack is un-
used, it is returned to the tail hugepage along with the rest. Oth-
erwise the tail hugepage is left behind in the
HugeFiller and
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    261

--- PAGE 7 ---
allocation slack
"free"
Figure 8: The slack from a large allocation spanning 3 huge-
pages is “donated” to the HugeFiller. The larger allocation’s
tail is treated as a ﬁctitious allocation.
only the ﬁrst N − 1 hugepages are returned to the HugeCache.
For certain allocation patterns, intermediate-size alloca-
tions produce more slack than we can ﬁll with smaller al-
locations in strict 2MiB bins. For example, many 1.1MiB
allocations will produce 0.9MiB of slack per hugepage (see
Figure 12). When we detect this pattern, the HugeRegion
allocator places allocations across hugepage boundaries to
minimize this overhead.
Small requests (<= 1MiB) are always served from the
HugeFiller. For allocations between 1MiB and a hugepage,
we evaluate several options:
1. We try the HugeFiller: if we have available space there
we use it and are happy to ﬁll a mostly-empty page.
2. If the HugeFiller can’t serve these requests, we next
consider HugeRegion; if we have regions allocated
which can serve the request, we do so. If no region exists
(or they’re all too full) we consider allocating one, but
only, as discussed below, if we’ve measured high ratios
of slack to small allocations.
3. Otherwise, we allocate a full hugepage from the
HugeCache. This generates slack, but we anticipate that
it will be ﬁlled by future allocations.
We make a design choice in T EMERAIRE to care about
external fragmentation up to the level of a hugepage, but
essentially not at all past it (but see Section 4.5 for an excep-
tion.) For example, a system with a single 1 GiB free range
and one with 512 discontiguous free hugepages is handled
equally well by T
EMERAIRE . In either case, the allocator
will (typically) return all of the unused space to the OS; a
fresh allocation of 1 GiB will require faulting in memory in
either case. In the fragmented scenario, we will need to do
so on fresh virtual memory. Waste of virtual address range
unoccupied by live allocations and not consuming physical
memory is not a concern, since with 64-bit address spaces,
virtual memory is practically free.
while (true) {
Delete(New(512KB))
}
Figure 9: Program which repeatedly drains a single hugepage.
4.2 HugeAllocator
HugeAllocator
tracks mapped virtual memory. All OS map-
pings are made here. It stores hugepage-aligned unbacked
ranges (i.e. those with no associated physical memory.) Vir-
tual memory is nearly free, so we aim for simplicity and rea-
sonable speed. Our implementation tracks unused ranges with
a treap [
40]. We augment subtrees with their largest contained
range, which lets us quickly select an approximate best-ﬁt.
4.3 HugeCache
The HugeCache tracks backed ranges of memory at full huge-
page granularity. A consequence of the HugeFiller ﬁlling
and draining whole hugepages is that we need to decide when
to return empty hugepages to the OS. We will regret returning
memory we will need again, and equally regret not returning
memory that will languish in the cache. Returning memory
eagerly means we make syscalls to return the memory and
take page faults to reuse it. Releasing memory only at the rate
requested by TCM ALLOC ’s periodic release thread means
memory is held unused.
Consider the artiﬁcial program in Figure 9 with no addi-
tional heap allocations. On each iteration of the loop, ‘New‘
requires a new hugepage and places it with the HugeFiller.
‘Delete‘ removes the allocation and the hugepage is now com-
pletely free. Returning eagerly would require a syscall every
iteration for this simple, but pathological program.
We track periodicity in the demand over a 2-second slid-
ing window and calculate the minimum and maximum seen
(demandmin, demandmax). Whenever memory is returned to
the HugeCache, we return hugepages to the OS if the cache
would be larger than demandmax − demandmin. We also tried
other algorithms, but this one is simple and sufﬁces to capture
the empirical dynamics we’ve seen. The cache is allowed
to grow as long as our windowed demand has seen a need
for the new size. In oscillating usage, this will (incorrectly)
free memory once, then (correctly) keep it from then on. Fig-
ure 10 shows our cache size for a Tensorﬂow workload which
rapidly oscillates usage by a large fraction; we track the actu-
ally needed memory tightly.
4.4 HugeFiller
The HugeFiller satisﬁes smaller allocations that each ﬁt
within a single hugepage. This satisﬁes the majority of allo-
cations (78% of the pageheap is backed by the HugeFiller
262    15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association

--- PAGE 8 ---
0
100
200
300
400
500
demand
total usage
time
memory (MiB)
Figure 10: Tensorﬂow’s demand on the HugeCache over time,
plotted with the cache limit (+demand). Notice that we tightly
track their saw-toothed demand the ﬁrst time it drops. After
that, we recognize the pattern and keep the peak demand in
cache.
on average across the ﬂeet) and is the most important–and
most optimized–component of our system. Within a given
hugepage, we use a simple (and fast) best-ﬁt algorithm to
place an allocation; the challenging part is deciding which
hugepage to place an allocation on.
This component solves our binpacking problem: our goal
is to segment hugepages into some that are kept maximally
full, and others that are empty or nearly so. The emptiest
hugepages can be reclaimed (possibly breaking up a huge-
page as needed) while minimizing the impact on hugepage
coverage as the densely-ﬁlled pages cover most used memory
with hugepages. But it is challenging to empty out hugepages,
since we cannot rely on any particular allocation disappearing.
A secondary goal is to minimize fragmentation within each
hugepage, to make new requests more likely to be served.
If the system needs a new
K-page span and no free ranges
of ≥ K pages are available, we require a hugepage from
the HugeCache. This creates slack of ( 2MiB − K ∗ pagesize),
wasting space.
These give us two goals to prioritize. Since we want to
maximize the probability of hugepages becoming totally free,
nearly-empty hugepages are precious. Since we need to mini-
mize fragmentation, hugepages with long free ranges are also
precious. Both priorities are satisﬁed by preserving hugepages
with the longest free range, as longer free ranges must have
fewer in-use blocks. We organize our hugepages into ranked
lists correspondingly, leveraging per-hugepage statistics.
Inside each hugepage, we track a bitmap of used pages;
to ﬁll a request from some hugepage we do a best-ﬁt search
from that bitmap. We also track several statistics:
• the longest free range (L), the number of contiguous
pages not already allocated,
• the total number of allocations (A),
• the total number of used pages (U).
These three statistics determine a priority order of huge-
pages to place allocations. We choose the hugepage with the
lowest sufﬁcient L and the highest A. For an allocation of K
pages, we ﬁrst consider only hugepages whose longest free
range is sufﬁcient ( L ≥ K). This determines whether a huge-
page is a possible allocation target. Among hugepages with
the minimum L ≥ K, we prioritize by fullness. Substantial
experimentation led us to choose A, rather than U.
This choice is motivated by a radioactive decay-type al-
location model [16] where each allocation, of any size, is
equally likely to become free (with some probability p). In
this model a hugepage with 5 allocations has a probability
of becoming free of
p5 << p; so we should very strongly
avoid allocating from hugepages with very few allocations.
In particular, this model predicts A is a much better model of
"emptiness" than U: one allocation of size M is more likely
to be deallocated than M allocations of size 1.
The decay model isn’t perfectly true in real applications, but
it is an effective approximation, and experimentation backs up
its primary claim: prioritizing by
A empties substantially more
pages than prioritizing by U. (In practice, using U produces
acceptable results, but meaningfully worse ones.)
In some more detail, A is used to compute a chunk index C,
given by min(0,Cmax − log2(A)). We compute our chunk in-
dex so that our fullest pages have C = 0 and the emptiest have
C = Cmax −1. In practice, we have found thatCmax = 8 chunks
are sufﬁcient to avoid allocation from almost-empty pages.
Distinguishing hugepages with large counts is less important:
For example, we predict a hugepage with 200 allocations and
one with 150 as both very unlikely to completely drain. This
scheme prioritizes distinguishing gradations among pages
that might become empty.
We store hugepages in an array of lists, where each huge-
page is stored on the list at index I = Cmax ∗ L + C. Since
a K-page allocation is satisﬁable from any hugepage with
L >= K, the hugepages which can satisfy an allocation are ex-
actly those in lists with I >= Cmax ∗ K. We pick an (arbitrary)
hugepage from the least such nonempty list, accelerating that
to constant time with a bitmap of nonempty lists.
Our strategy differs from best ﬁt. Consider a hugepage X
with a 3 page gap and a 10 page gap and another hugepage
Y with a 5 page gap. Best ﬁt would prefer X. Our strategy
prefers Y . This strategy works since we are looking to allocate
on the most fragmented page, since fragmented pages are less
likely to become entirely free. If we need, say, 3 pages, then
pages which contain at most a gap of 3 available pages are
more likely to be fragmented and therefore good candidates
for allocation. Under the radioactive-decay model, allocations
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    263

--- PAGE 9 ---
0
100
200
300
400
500
time
memory (MiB)
 Demand
LFR-priority
Best-ﬁt
Fullness-priority
Figure 11: HugeFiller with various bin-packing strate-
gies. Best ﬁt is outperformed by prioritizing either fullness or
longest free range (LFR); LFR dominates fullness.
near large gaps are as likely as any other to become free,
which can cause those gaps to substantially grow; they can
then be used for large allocations. We treat that 10-page gap
as precious and avoid allocating near it unless nothing else
works, which allows it to grow.
Figure 11 demonstrates this in a simple case. We plot the
demand on the HugeFiller from a synthetic trace (see Sec-
tion 6.1). We also show the total used memory from three
approaches: HugeFiller’s actual search, a search that priori-
tizes fullness over fragmentation ( A over L), and a global best
ﬁt. Note that the trace includes a substantial one-time drop,
to go with random ﬂuctuations in usage. Our LFR-priority
algorithm beats both other approaches. In particular, we see
that after the usage drop, best-ﬁt barely recovers any total
memory, and ﬁnishes with close to 100% overhead, whereas
both other algorithms closely match the actual demand.
Surprisingly, this simple strategy substantially outperforms
a global best ﬁt algorithm–placing a request in the single gap
in any hugepage that is closest to its size. Best-ﬁt would be
prohibitively expensive—we cannot search 10-100K huge-
pages for every request, but it’s quite counter-intuitive that it
also produces higher fragmentation. Best-ﬁt being far from
optimal for general fragmentation problems is not a new re-
sult [36], but it’s interesting to see how poor it can be here.
A last important detail is that donated hugepages are less
desirable allocation targets than any non-donated hugepage.
Consider the pathological program looping:
while (true) {
// Reserve 51 hugepages + donate tail of last
L = New(100 MiB + 1 page);
// Make a small allocation
S = New(1);
// Delete large allocation
Delete(L);
}
Each iteration only allocates 1 (net) page, but if we always
use the slack from L to satisfy S, we will end up placing
each S on its own hugepage. In practice, simply refusing to
use donated pages if others are available prevents this, while
effectively using slack where it’s needed.
4.5 HugeRegion
HugeCache
(and HugeAllocator behind it) sufﬁces for large
allocations, where rounding to a full hugepage is a small
cost.
HugeFiller works well for small allocations that can
be packed into single hugepages. HugeRegion helps those
between.
Consider a request for 1.1 MiB of memory. We serve it
from the HugeFiller, leaving 0.9 MiB of unused memory
from the 2MiB hugepage: the slack space. The HugeFiller
assumes that slack will be ﬁlled by future small (<1MiB)
allocations, and typically it is: our observed byte ratio of ﬂeet-
wide small allocations to slack is 15:1. In the limit we can
imagine a binary that requests literally nothing but 1.1 MiB
spans in Figure 12.
The HugeRegion deals with this problem, which is to
some extent caused by our own choices. We focus heavily
on packing allocations into hugepage-sized bins with the
HugeFiller, and our desire to do that with donated slack
is catastrophic with some allocation patterns. Most normal
binaries are of course ﬁne without it, but a general purpose
memory allocator needs to handle diverse workloads, even
those dominated by slack-heavy allocations. Clearly, we must
be able to allocate these lying across hugepage boundaries.
HugeRegion neatly eliminates this pathological case.
A HugeRegion is a large ﬁxed-size allocation (currently 1
GiB) tracked at small-page granularity with the same kind
of bitmaps used by individual hugepages in the HugeFiller.
As with those single hugepage ranges, we best-ﬁt any request
across all pages in the region. We keep a list of these re-
gions, ordered by longest free range, for the same reason as
HugeFiller. Allocating from these larger bins immediately
allows large savings in wasted space: rather than losing 0.9
MiB/hugepage in our pessimal load, we lose 0.9 MiB per
a s
Figure 12: Slack (“s”) can accumulate when many allocations
(“a”) are placed on single hugepages. No single slack region
is large enough to accommodate a subsequent allocation of
size “a.”
264    15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association

--- PAGE 10 ---
HugeRegion, only about 0.1%. (This motivates the large size
of each region.)
Most programs don’t need regions at all. We do not allocate
any region until we’ve accumulated large quantities of slack
that are larger than the total of the program’s small allocations.
Fleetwide, only 8.8% of programs trigger usage of regions,
but the feature is still important: 53.2% of allocations in those
binaries are served from regions. One such workload is a
key-value store that loads long-lived data in large chunks
into memory and makes a small number of short-lived small
allocations for serving requests. Without regions, the request-
related allocations are unable to ﬁll the slack generated by the
larger allocations. This technique prevents this slack-heavy
uncommon allocation pattern from bloating memory use.
4.6 Memory Release
As discussed above, Release(N) is invoked periodically by
support threads at a steady trickle.
To implement our interface’s Release(N) methods,
TEMERAIRE typically just frees hugepage ranges from
HugeCache and possibly shrinks its limit as described above.
Releasing more than the hinted N pages is not a problem; the
support threads use the actual released amount as feedback,
and adjust future calls to target the correct overall rate.
If the HugeCache cannot release N pages of memory, the
HugeFiller will subrelease just the free (small) pages on the
emptiest hugepage.
Returning small pages from partially ﬁlled hugepages
(“subreleasing” them) is the last resort for reducing memory
footprints as the process is largely irreversible 6. By returning
some but not all small pages on a hugepage, we cause the OS
to replace the single page table entry spanning the hugepage
with small entries for the remaining pages. This one-way op-
eration, through increased TLB misses, slows down accesses
to the remaining memory. The Linux kernel will use small
pagetable entries for the still-used pages, even if we re-use
the released address space later. We make these return deci-
sions in the
HugeFiller, where we manage partially ﬁlled
hugepages.
The HugeFiller treats the subreleased hugepages sepa-
rately: we do not allocate from them unless no other hugepage
is usable. Allocations placed on this memory will not beneﬁt
from hugepages, so this helps performance and allows these
partially released hugepages to become completely empty.
5 Evaluation of T EMERAIRE
We evaluated T EMERAIRE on Google’s WSC workloads.
The evaluation was concerned with several metrics, includ-
6While the THP machinery may reassemble hugepages, it is non-
deterministic and dependent on system utilization. There is a negative feed-
back loop here where high-utilization scenarios actually compete with and
impede THP progress that might beneﬁt them the most.
ing both CPU and memory savings. We present evaluations
of T EMERAIRE on several key services, measuring 10% of
cycles and 15% of RAM usage in our WSC. In section 6.4
we discuss workload diversity; in this evaluation we examine
data across all workloads using our experimental framework
and ﬂeetwide-proﬁler telemetry. We’ve argued for prioritizing
workload efﬁciency over the attributable cost of malloc; we
therefore examine IPC metrics (as a proxy for user through-
put) and where possible, we obtained application-level perfor-
mance metrics to gauge workload productivity (e.g., requests-
per-second per core) on our servers. We present longitudinal
data from the rollout of T EMERAIRE to all TCM ALLOC users
in our ﬂeet.
Overall, TEMERAIRE proved a signiﬁcant win for CPU and
memory.
5.1 Application Case Studies
We worked with performance-sensitive applications to enable
TEMERAIRE in their production systems, and measure the
effect. We summarize the results in Table 1. Where possible,
we measured each application’s user-level performance met-
rics (throughput-per-CPU and latency). These applications
use roughly 10% of cycles and 15% of RAM in our WSC.
Four of these applications ( search1; search2; search3;
and loadbalancer) had previously turned off the periodic
memory release feature of TCM ALLOC . This allowed them
to have good hugepage coverage, even with the legacy page-
heap’s hugepage-oblivious implementation, at the expense of
memory. We did not change that setting with T EMERAIRE .
These applications maintained their high levels of CPU per-
formance while reducing their total memory footprint.
With the exception of Redis, all of these applications are
multithreaded. With the exception of search3, these work-
loads run on a single NUMA domain with local data.
• Tensorﬂow [1] is a commonly used machine learning ap-
plication. It had previously used a high periodic release
rate to minimize memory pressure, albeit at the expense
of hugepages and page faults.
• search1, search2, ads1, ads2, ads4, ads5 receive
RPCs and make subsequent RPCs of their own other
services.
• search3, ads3, ads6 are leaf RPC servers, performing
read-mostly retrieval tasks.
• Spanner [17] is a node in a distributed database. It also
includes an in-memory cache of data read from disk
which adapts to the memory provisioned for the process
and unused elsewhere by the program.
• loadbalancer receives updates over RPC and periodi-
cally publishes summary statistics.
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    265

--- PAGE 11 ---
Application Throughput Mean
Latency
RSS
(GiB)
RAM
change
IPC dTLB Load Walk (%) malloc (% of cycles) Page Fault (% of cycles)
Before After Before After Before After Before After
Tensorﬂow [1] +26%
search1 [6, 18]† 8.4 -8.7% 1.33 ± 0.04 1.43 ± 0.02 9.5 ± 0.6 9.0 ± 0.6 5.9 ± 0.09 5.9 ± 0.12 0.005 ± 0.003 0.131 ± 0.071
search2† 3.7 -20% 1.28 ± 0.01 1.29 ± 0.01 10.3 ± 0.2 10.2 ± 0.1 4.37 ± 0.05 4.38 ± 0.02 0.003 ± 0.003 0.032 ± 0.002
search3 † 234 -7% 1.64 ± 0.02 1.67 ± 0.02 8.9 ± 0.1 8.9 ± 0.3 3.2 ± 0.02 3.3 ± 0.04 0.001 ± 0.000 0.005 ± 0.001
ads1 +2.5% -14% 4.8 -6.9% 0.77 ± 0.02 0.84 ± 0.01 38.1 ± 1.3 15.9 ± 0.3 2.3 ± 0.04 2.7 ± 0.05 0.012 ± 0.003 0.011 ± 0.002
ads2 +3.4% -1.7% 5.6 -6.5% 1.12 ± 0.01 1.22 ± 0.01 27.4 ± 0.4 10.3 ± 0.2 2.7 ± 0.03 3.5 ± 0.08 0.022 ± 0.001 0.047 ± 0.001
ads3 +0.5% -0.2% 50.6 -0.8% 1.36 ± 0.01 1.43 ± 0.01 27.1 ± 0.5 11.6 ± 0.2 2.9 ± 0.04 3.2 ± 0.03 0.067 ± 0.002 0.03 ± 0.003
ads4 +6.6% -1.1% 2.5 -1.7% 0.87 ± 0.01 0.93 ± 0.01 28.5 ± 0.9 11.1 ± 0.3 4.2 ± 0.05 4.9 ± 0.04 0.022 ± 0.001 0.008 ± 0.001
ads5 +1.8% -0.7% 10.0 -1.1% 1.16 ± 0.02 1.16 ± 0.02 21.9 ± 1.2 16.7 ± 2.4 3.6 ± 0.08 3.8 ± 0.15 0.018 ± 0.002 0.033 ± 0.007
ads6 +15% -10% 53.5 -2.3% 1.40 ± 0.02 1.59 ± 0.03 33.6 ± 2.4 17.8 ± 0.4 13.5 ± 0.48 9.9 ± 0.07 0.037 ± 0.012 0.048 ± 0.067
Spanner [17] +6.3% 7.0 1.55 ± 0.30 1.70 ± 0.14 31.0 ± 4.3 15.7 ± 1.8 3.1 ± 0.88 3.0 ± 0.24 0.025 ± 0.08 0.024 ± 0.01
loadbalancer† 1.4 -40% 1.38 ± 0.12 1.39 ± 0.28 19.6 ± 1.2 9.5 ± 4.5 11.5 ± 0.60 10.7 ± 0.46 0.094 ± 0.06 0.057 ± 0.062
Average (all WSC apps) +5.2% -7.9% 1.26 1.33 23.3 12.4 5.2 5.0 0.058 0.112
Redis† +0.75%
Redis +0.44%
Table 1: Application experiments from enabling T EMERAIRE . Throughput is normalized for CPU. †: Applications’ periodic
memory release turned off. dTLB load walk (%) is the fraction of cycles spent page walking, not accessing the L2 TLB. malloc
(% of cycles) is the relative amount of time in allocation and deallocation functions. 90%th conﬁdence intervals reported.
• Redis is a popular, open-source key-value store. We
evaluated the performance of Redis 6.0.9 [
42] with
TEMERAIRE , using TCM ALLOC ’s legacy page heap as
a baseline. These experiments were run on servers with
Intel Skylake Xeon processors. Redis and TCM ALLOC
were compiled with LL VM built from Git commit
‘cd442157cf‘ using ‘-O3‘. In each conﬁguration, we ran
2000 trials of ‘redis-benchmark‘, with each trial making
1000000 requests to push 5 elements and read those 5
elements.
For the 8 applications with periodic release, we observed a
mean CPU improvement of 7.7% and a mean RAM reduction
of 2.4%. Two of these workloads did not see memory reduc-
tions. T EMERAIRE ’s HugeCache design handles Tensorﬂow’s
allocation pattern well, but cannot affect its bursty demand.
Spanner maximizes its caches up to a certain memory limit,
so reducing TCM ALLOC ’s overhead meant more application
data could be cached within the same footprint.
5.2 Fleet experiment
We randomly selected 1% of the machines distributed through-
out our WSCs as an experiment group and a separate 1% as
a control group (see section 6.4). We enabled T EMERAIRE
on all applications running on the experiment machines. The
applications running on control machines continued to use
the stock pageheap in TCM ALLOC .
Our ﬂeetwide proﬁler lets us correlate performance metrics
against the groupings above. We collected data on memory
usage, hugepage coverage, overall IPC, and TLB misses. At
the time of the experiment, application-level performance
metrics (throughput-per-CPU, latency) were not collected. In
our analysis, we distinguish between applications that period-
ically release memory to the OS and those that turn off this
feature to preserve hugepages with TCM ALLOC ’s prior non-
hugepage-aware pageheap. Figure 13 shows that TEMERAIRE
improved hugepage coverage, increasing the percentage of
heap memory backed by hugepages from 11.8% to 23% for
applications periodically releasing memory and from 44.3%
to 67.3% for applications not periodically releasing memory.
periodic release on periodic release off
0
20
40
60
80
11.8
44.3
23
67.3
% hugepage coverage
control TEMERAIRE
Figure 13: Percentage of heap memory backed by hugepages
during ﬂeet experiment and 90%th conﬁdence interval. (Error
bars in "release on" condition are too small to cleanly render.)
We observed a strong improvement even in the case that pe-
riodic release was disabled. Since these binaries do not break
up hugepages in either conﬁguration, the beneﬁt is derived
from increased system-wide availability of hugepages (due
to reduced fragmentation in other applications). T EMERAIRE
improves this situation in two ways: since we aggressively re-
lease empty hugepages (where the traditional pageheap does
not), we consume fewer hugepages that we do not need, allow-
ing other applications to more successfully request them, and
other co-located applications are no longer breaking up huge-
pages at the same rate. Even if we map large aligned regions
of memory and do not interfere with transparent hugepages,
the kernel cannot always back these with hugepages [ 26, 33].
Fragmentation in physical memory can limit the number of
available hugepages on the system.
We next examine the effect this hugepage coverage had
266    15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association

--- PAGE 12 ---
Periodic
Release
Walk Cycles (%) MPKI
Control Exp. Control Exp.
On 12.5 11.9 (-4.5%) 1.20 1.14 (-5.4%)
Off 14.1 13.4 (-5%) 1.36 1.29 (-5.1%)
Table 2: dTLB load miss page walk cycles as percentage of
application usage and dTLB misses per thousand instructions
(MPKI) without T EMERAIRE (Control) T EMERAIRE enabled
(Exp.)
on TLB misses. Again, we break down between apps that
enable and disable periodic memory release. We measure the
percentage of total cycles spent in a dTLB load stall 7.
We see reductions of 4.5-5% of page walk miss cycles
(Table 2). We see in the experiment data that apps not re-
leasing memory (which have better hugepage coverage) have
higher dTLB stall costs, which is slightly surprising. Our dis-
cussions with teams managing these applications is that they
turn off memory release because they need to guarantee per-
formance: on average, they have more challenging memory
access patterns and consequently greater concerns about mi-
croarchitectural variance. By disabling this release under the
prior implementation, they observed better application perfor-
mance and fewer TLB stalls. With T EMERAIRE , we see our
improved hugepage coverage leads to materially lower dTLB
costs for both classes of applications.
For our last CPU consideration, we measured the over-
all impact on IPC 8. Fleetwide overall IPC in the control
group was 0.796647919 ± 4e−9; in the experiment group,
0.806301729 ± 5e−9 instructions-per-cycle. This 1.2% im-
provement is small in relative terms but is a large absolute
savings (especially when considered in the context of the
higher individual application beneﬁts discussed earlier).
For memory usage, we looked at pageheap overhead: the
ratio of backed memory in the pageheap to the total heap
memory in use by the application. The experiment group
decreased this from 15.0% to 11.2%, again, a signiﬁcant im-
provement. The production experiments comprise thousands
of applications running continuously on many thousands of
machines, conferring high conﬁdence in a ﬂeetwide beneﬁt.
5.3 Full rollout trajectories
With data gained from individual applications and the
1% experiment, we changed the default 9 behavior to use
TEMERAIRE . This rolled out to 100% of our workloads grad-
ually [10, 38].
Over this deployment, we observed a reduction in cycles
stalled on TLB misses (L2 TLB and page walks) from 21.6%
7More precisely cycles spent page walking, not accessing the L2 TLB.
8Our source of IPC data is not segmented by periodic background memory
release status.
9This doesn’t imply, quite, that every binary uses it. We allow opt outs
for various operational needs.
-1.3%
10 20 30 40 50 60
5
10
15
20
time (days)
%age of TLB miss cycles
load (old)
 store (old)
load (T EMERAIRE )
 store (T EMERAIRE )
Figure 14: Stacked line graph showing effect of T EMERAIRE
rollout on TLB miss cycles. We see an overall downward
trend from 21.6% to 20.3% as T EMERAIRE became a larger
fraction of observed usage in our WSC.
to 20.3% (6% reduction) and a reduction in pageheap over-
head from 14.3% to 10.6% (26% reduction). Figure 14 shows
the effect on TLB misses over time: at each point we show
the total percentage of cycles attributable to TLB stalls (load
and store), broken down by pageheap implementation. As
TEMERAIRE rolled out ﬂeetwide, it caused a noticeable down-
ward trend.
Figure 15 shows a similar plot of pageheap overhead. We
see another signiﬁcant improvement. Hugepage optimization
has a natural tradeoff between space and time here; saving the
maximum memory possible requires breaking up hugepages,
which will cost CPU cycles. But T EMERAIRE outperforms
the previous design in both space and time. We highlight
several conclusions from our data:
Application productivity outpaced IPC . As noted above
and by Alameldeen et al. [ 3], simple hardware metrics don’t
always accurately reﬂect application-level beneﬁts. By all
indication, T EMERAIRE improved application metrics (RPS,
latencies, etc.) by more than IPC.
Gains were not driven by reduction in the cost of malloc.
Gains came from accelerating user code, which was some-
times drastic–in both directions. One application ( ads2) saw
an increase of malloc cycles from 2.7% to 3.5%, an apparent
regression, but they reaped improvements of 3.42% RPS, 1.7%
latency, and 6.5% peak memory usage.
There is still considerable headroom, and small percent-
ages matter. Even though T EMERAIRE has been successful,
hugepage coverage is still only 67% when using T EMERAIRE
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    267

--- PAGE 13 ---
-3.7%
20 40 60 80
5
10
15
time (days)
%age memory overhead
old
 TEMERAIRE
Figure 15: Stacked line graph showing effect of T EMERAIRE
rollout on pageheap overhead. Total memory overhead goes
from 14.3% to 10.6%, as T
EMERAIRE became a larger frac-
tion of observed usage in our WSC by growing from a handful
of applications (section 5.1) to nearly all applications.
without subrelease due to physical memory contiguity limita-
tions. Increasing to 100% would signiﬁcantly improve appli-
cation performance.
6 Strategies used in building T EMERAIRE
It is difﬁcult to predict the best approach for a complex sys-
tem a priori. Iteratively designing and improving a system
is a commonly used technique. Military pilots coined the
term “OODA (Observe, Orient, Decide, Act) loop” [
13] to
measure a particular sense of reaction time: seeing incom-
ing data, analyzing it, making choices, and acting on those
choices (producing new data and continuing the loop). Shorter
OODA loops are a tremendous tactical advantage to pilots
and accelerate our productivity as well. Optimizing our own
OODA loop–how quickly we could develop insight into a
design choice, evaluate its effectiveness, and iterate towards
better choices–was a crucial step in building T EMERAIRE .
While our ﬁnal evaluation was driven by execution on
our production servers, this was both too disruptive and too
risky to test intermediate ideas; however, malloc microbench-
marks are also not particularly interesting at the page level.
To address these challenges, we generated traces to drive the
development of TCM ALLOC in two ways.
6.1 “Empirical” distribution sampling
Our production ﬂeet implements a ﬂeet wide proﬁler [ 35].
Among the data collected by this proﬁler are ﬂeet-wide sam-
ples of malloc tagged with request size and other useful prop-
erties. We collect a sample of currently-live data in our heap
and calls to malloc. From these samples we can infer the
empirical distribution of size both for live objects and mal-
loc calls. Our empirical driver generates calls to malloc and
free as a Poisson process 10 that replicates these distributions,
while also targeting an arbitrary (average) heap size. That
target size can be changed over simulated time, reproducing
factors such as diurnal cycles, transient usage, or high startup
costs. We have made this driver and its inputs available on
Github (see Section 9).
Despite the name “empirical driver,” this remains a highly
unrealistic workload: every allocation (of a given size) is
equally likely to be freed at any timestep, and there is no cor-
relation between the sizes of consecutive allocation. Neither
does it reproduce per-thread or per-CPU dynamics. Never-
theless, the empirical driver is a fast, efﬁcient way to place
malloc under an extremely challenging load that successfully
replicates many macro characteristics of real work.
6.2 Heap tracing
Tracing every call to malloc without the instrumentation
overhead perturbing the workload itself is extremely difﬁcult,
even infeasible over long timescales. Typical applications
can make millions of calls to
malloc per second. Even if
tracing was accomplished non-disruptively, replaying these
traces back accurately into a memory allocator in real time or
faster is similarly intractable: it’s difﬁcult to force the right
combinations of threads to allocate, access, and free the right
buffers on the right CPU at the right (relative) time.
Fortunately, tracing the pageheap is considerably easier. It
is a single-threaded allocator, only invoked by a small fraction
of requests. Playback is also simple–our abstractions allow
directly instantiating and manipulating our pageheap repre-
sentation, rather than going through malloc() itself. Traces
taken from both real binaries and, surprisingly, the empirical
driver itself, played a major role in developing T EMERAIRE .
TEMERAIRE ’s components serve a request for K pages
with memory at address [p, p + K), but never read or write
that memory range. We built this for unit testing–allowing
the test of corner cases such as 64 GiB of allocations without
actually needing 64 GiB of memory–but this is also crucial
to accelerating simulations. What might take hours with the
empirical driver can be played back in minutes.
10Little’s law tells us that the average number of live objects L is equal to
the product of the arrival rate λ and average lifetime W . To replicate a given
distribution of live/allocation object sizes where pa of live objects have size
a, we set Wa = c·pa
λa . (c is a scaling parameter that determines the total heap
size.)
268    15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association

--- PAGE 14 ---
6.3 Telemetry
Beyond producing numbers motivating and evaluating our
work, our ﬂeetwide proﬁler is itself a powerful tool for de-
signing allocators. It reveals patterns of allocation we can use
to derive heuristics, it allows validation of hypotheses about
typical (or even possible) behavior, it helps identify which pat-
terns we can safely ignore as unimportant and which we must
optimize. Besides being used in obvious ways–such as tuning
cache sizes to ﬁt typical use or determining thresholds for
“small” allocations based on the CDF of allocations–querying
the proﬁler was our ﬁrst step whenever we were unsure of
useful facts. We gained conﬁdence that our approach to ﬁlling
slack (see section
4.5) worked on diverse workloads by query-
ing the proﬁler for ratios of page allocation sizes. Providing
large scale telemetry that can be consumed by data analysis
tools makes it easy to test and eliminate hypotheses. Such
"tiny experiments" [8] lead to better designs.
This reﬂects a cultivated mindset in identifying new teleme-
try. Our ﬁrst question for any new project is “What metrics
should we add to our ﬂeetwide proﬁler?” We continually
expose more of the allocator’s internal state and derived statis-
tics, such as cache hit rates. While we can form some hypothe-
ses using traditional loadtests, this technique helps validate
their generality.
6.4 Experiment framework
We have also developed an experiment framework allowing us
to A/B test implementations or tuning choices across our ﬂeet
at scale. We can enable or disable experiment groups across
a small percentage of all our machines, without requiring
product teams running services on those machines to take any
action. A/B testing is not a new approach, but enabling it at
the scale of our WSC is a powerful development tool.
As discussed above, our A/B experiment for T EMERAIRE
demonstrated improved hugepage coverage, even for jobs
that never released memory. This is an example of an effect–
against neighboring, collocated services–that might go unno-
ticed during the test of an individual service.
We’ve observed two noteworthy advantages to A/B experi-
mentation:
• Reduced cost and uncertainty associated with major be-
havioral changes. Small 1% experiments can uncover
latent problems well before we roll new defaults, at far
less cost [10, Appendix B].
• Reduced likelihood of overﬁtting to easily tested work-
loads. Tuning for production-realistic loadtests, while
great for the applications they represent, can result in
non-ideal results for other workloads. Instead, we can be
conﬁdent our optimization is good on average for every-
one, and detect (and ﬁx) applications that see problems.
Experiments allow us to evaluate changes on diverse work-
loads. Kanev, et. al. [ 24] proposed prefetching the next object
i + 1 when malloc is returning object i from its freelists. Ef-
fective prefetches need to be timely [28]. Too early and data
can be evicted from the cache before use. Too late and the pro-
gram waits. In this case, prefetching object i when returning
it, turns out to be too late: User code will write to the object
within a few cycles, far sooner than the prefetch’s access to
main memory can complete. Prefetching object i + 1 gives
time for the object to be loaded into the cache by the time
the next allocation occurs. Independent of the experiments
to develop T EMERAIRE , we added this next object prefetch
for TCM ALLOC usage in our WSC despite the contrarian
evidence that it appears to slowdown microbenchmarks and
increases apparent malloc cost. We were able to still identify
this beneﬁt thanks to the introspective techniques described
here, allowing us to prove that application performance was
improved at scale in our WSC; both unlocking important per-
formance gains and proving the generality of these macro
approaches.
7 Future Work
Peak vs. average.
A job quickly oscillating between peak
and trough demand cannot be usefully binpacked against its
average. Even if the allocator could instantaneously return
unused memory, job schedulers could not make use of it be-
fore it was required again. Thus transient overhead is not a
practical opportunity [
43]. This guides us to measure how
overhead changes over time, which can motivate slower re-
lease rates [31] or application of compaction techniques (such
as Mesh [ 34]).
Intermediate caches / exposed free spans. TCM ALLOC ’s
design of stacked caches makes for direct optimization and is
highly scalable, but hides useful cross-layer information. A
good example comes from Bigtable at Google [ 14]. Cached
ranges are 8 KiB malloc’d segments (i.e. one TCM ALLOC
page) to avoid fragmentation. Meaning, most freed buffers
won’t make it past the local cache or central freelist; only
when a full span’s worth is simultaneously freed (and some-
how pushed out of TCM ALLOC ’s local cache) do these freed
buffers get returned to the pageheap. If every alloc/free of
these chunks were visible to the pageheap, we’d be able to re-
duce fragmentation–we’d have a much more precise estimate
of available space within each hugepage. Of course, if every
malloc(8192)/free went to the pageheap, we would also
eliminate all scalability! There must be a middle ground. Can
we expose the contents of frontline caches to the pageheap
and reduce fragmentation?
Upfront costs / amortization / prediction.
The fact we can-
not anticipate what Delete() calls will come in the future
is the hardest part of building a hugepage-friendly algorithm.
We try to generate empty hugepages through heuristics and
hope: we aim to have mostly-empty things stay that way and
hope that the ﬁnal allocations will quickly get freed. But some
allocations are likely immortal–common data structures that
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    269

--- PAGE 15 ---
are used throughout the program’s run, or frequently used
pages that will bounce in and out of local caches.
We can improve allocation decisions when we know–
immortal or not–they will be hot and see frequent access.
Ensuring these allocations are placed onto hugepages pro-
vides larger marginal performance beneﬁt. TLB misses occur
on access, so it may be preferable to save memory rather than
improve access latency to colder allocations.
Far memory cooperation
“Far memory” [ 27] allows us to
move data to slower, but less expensive memory, reducing
DRAM costs. Clustering rarely accessed allocations can make
far memory more effective. More overhead can be afforded on
those decisions since they can’t happen very often. Avenues
like machine learning [30] or proﬁle directed optimization [15,
37] show promise for identifying these allocations.
Userspace-Kernel Cooperation TEMERAIRE places mem-
ory in a layout designed to be compatible with kernel huge-
page policy (Section
2), but this is only an implicit cooper-
ation. Kernel APIs which prioritize the allocation of huge-
pages within an address space or across processes would en-
able proactive management of which regions were hugepage-
backed, versus the current best-effort reactive implementation.
In developing T EMERAIRE , we considered but did not de-
ploy an interface to request a memory region be immediately
repopulated with hugepages. T EMERAIRE primarily tries to
avoid breaking up hugepages altogether as the existing THP
machinery is slow to reassemble them (Section 4.6). Being
able to initiate on-demand repopulation would allow an ap-
plication to resume placing allocations in that address space
range without a performance gap.
A common problem today is that the ﬁrst applications to
execute on a machine are able to claim the majority of huge-
pages, even if higher priority applications are subsequently
assigned. We ultimately imagine that such a management
system might execute as an independent user daemon, coop-
erating with individual applications. Kernel APIs could allow
hugepages to be more intelligently allocated against a more
detailed gradient of priority, beneﬁt, and value.
8 Related work
Some work has optimized malloc for cache efﬁciency of
user-level applications. To minimize L1 conﬂicts, Dice [ 19]
proposed jittering allocation sizes. Similarly, a cache-index-
aware allocator [2] reduces conﬂict misses by changing rela-
tive placement of objects inside pages. mimalloc [29] tries to
give users objects from the same page, increasing the locality.
Addressing this at the kernel level alone would face the
same fragmentation challenges and be more difﬁcult to handle
because we have less control over application memory usage.
The kernel can back the memory region with a hugepage,
but if the application does not densely allocate from that
hugepage, memory is wasted by fragmentation. Prior work
has examined the kernel side of this problem: Kwon et. al. [26]
proposed managing memory contiguity as a resource at the
kernel level. Panwar et. al. [ 32] observed memory bloat from
using the Linux’s transparent hugepage implementation, due
to insufﬁcient userspace level packing.
Optimization of TLB usage in general has been discussed
extensively; Basu [ 7] suggested resurrecting segments to
avoid it entirely, addressing TLB usage at the architectural
level. CoLT [
33] proposed variable-size hugepages to mini-
mize the impact of fragmentation. Illuminator [ 5] improves
page decisions in the kernel to reduce physical memory frag-
mentation. Ingens [ 26] attempts to fairly distribute a lim-
ited supply of kernel-level hugepages and HawkEye [ 32]
manages kernel allocation of hugepages to control memory
bloat. Kernel-based solutions can be defeated by hugepage-
oblivious user allocators that return partial hugepages to the
OS and fail to densely pack allocations onto hugepages.
At the malloc level, SuperMalloc [ 25] considers huge-
pages, but only for very large allocations. MallocPool [ 22]
uses similar variable-sized TLBs as CoLT [ 33] but does not
attempt to used ﬁxed-size hugepages. LLAMA [ 30] studies
a possible solution using lifetime predictions, but solutions
with practical costs remain open problems.
9 Conclusion
In warehouse scale computers, TLB lookup penalties are one
of the most signiﬁcant compute costs facing large applica-
tions. T
EMERAIRE optimizes the whole WSC by changing
the memory allocator to make hugepage-conscious place-
ment decisions while minimizing fragmentation. Application
case studies of key workloads from Google’s WSCs show
RPS/CPU increased by 7.7% and RAM usage decreased by
2.4%. Experiments at ﬂeet scale and longitudinal data during
the rollout at Google showed a 6% reduction in cycles spent
in TLB misses, and 26% reduction in memory wasted due to
fragmentation. Since the memory system is the biggest bot-
tleneck in WSC applications, there are further opportunities
to accelerate application performance by improving how the
allocator organizes memory and interacts with the OS.
Acknowledgments
Our thanks to our shepherd Tom Anderson for his help improv-
ing this paper. We also thank Atul Adya, Sanjay Ghemawat,
Urs Hölzle, Arvind Krishnamurthy, Martin Maas, Petros Ma-
niatis, Phil Miller, Danner Stodolsky, and Titus Winters, as
well as the OSDI reviewers, for their feedback.
A vailability
The code repository at https://github.com/google/tcmalloc
includes T EMERAIRE . It also includes the empirical driver
(6.1) and its input parameters (CDF of allocation sizes).
270    15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association

--- PAGE 16 ---
References
[1] Martin Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng
Chen, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, San-
jay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Man-
junath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Rajat Monga, Sherry
Moore, Derek G. Murray, Benoit Steiner, Paul Tucker,
Vijay V asudevan, Pete Warden, Martin Wicke, Y uan Y u,
and Xiaoqiang Zheng. Tensorﬂow: A system for large-
scale machine learning. In 12th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
16), pages 265–283, 2016.
[2] Y ehuda Afek, Dave Dice, and Adam Morrison. Cache
Index-Aware Memory Allocation. SIGPLAN Not. ,
46(11):55–64, June 2011.
[3] A. R. Alameldeen and D. A. Wood. IPC Considered
Harmful for Multiprocessor Workloads. IEEE Micro,
26(4):8–17, 2006.
[4] Andrea Arcangeli. Transparent hugepage support. 2010.
[5] Aravinda Prasad Ashish Panwar and K. Gopinath. Mak-
ing Huge Pages Actually Useful. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Third International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems (ASPLOS ’18), 2018.
[6] Luiz Andre Barroso, Jeffrey Dean, and Urs Hölzle. Web
search for a planet: The google cluster architecture.
IEEE Micro, 23:22–28, 2003.
[7] Arkaprava Basu, Jayneel Gandhi, Jichuan Chang,
Mark D. Hill, and Michael M. Swift. Efﬁcient Virtual
Memory for Big Memory Servers. In Proceedings of
the 40th Annual International Symposium on Computer
Architecture, ISCA ’13, page 237–248, New Y ork, NY ,
USA, 2013. Association for Computing Machinery.
[8] Jon Bentley. Tiny Experiments for Algorithms and Life.
In Experimental Algorithms, pages 182–182, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2006. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[9] Emery D. Berger, Kathryn S. McKinley, Robert D. Blu-
mofe, and Paul R. Wilson. Hoard: A Scalable Memory
Allocator for Multithreaded Applications. SIGPLAN
Not., 35(11):117–128, November 2000.
[10] Jennifer Petoff Betsy Beyer, Chris Jones and
Niall Richard Murphy. Site Reliability Engineering:
How Google Runs Production Systems . O’Reilly Media,
Inc, 2016.
[11] Stephen M. Blackburn, Perry Cheng, and Kathryn S.
McKinley. Myths and Realities: The Performance Im-
pact of Garbage Collection. In Proceedings of the Joint
International Conference on Measurement and Mod-
eling of Computer Systems , SIGMETRICS ’04/Perfor-
mance ’04, page 25–36, New Y ork, NY , USA, 2004.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[12] Jeff Bonwick and Jonathan Adams. Magazines and
Vmem: Extending the Slab Allocator to Many CPUs
and Arbitrary Resources. In Proceedings of the Gen-
eral Track: 2001 USENIX Annual Technical Conference,
page 15–33, USA, 2001. USENIX Association.
[13] John R. Boyd. Patterns of Conﬂict. 1981.
[14]
Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, Wilson C.
Hsieh, Deborah A. Wallach, Mike Burrows, Tushar
Chandra, Andrew Fikes, and Robert E. Gruber. Bigtable:
A Distributed Storage System for Structured Data. In
7th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI), pages 205–218, 2006.
[15] Dehao Chen, David Xinliang Li, and Tipp Moseley. Aut-
ofdo: Automatic Feedback-Directed Optimization for
Warehouse-Scale Applications. In CGO 2016 Proceed-
ings of the 2016 International Symposium on Code Gen-
eration and Optimization, pages 12–23, New Y ork, NY ,
USA, 2016.
[16] William D. Clinger and Lars T. Hansen. Generational
Garbage Collection and the Radioactive Decay Model.
SIGPLAN Not., 32(5):97–108, May 1997.
[17] James C. Corbett, Jeffrey Dean, Michael Epstein,
Andrew Fikes, Christopher Frost, JJ Furman, Sanjay
Ghemawat, Andrey Gubarev, Christopher Heiser, Pe-
ter Hochschild, Wilson Hsieh, Sebastian Kanthak, Eu-
gene Kogan, Hongyi Li, Alexander Lloyd, Sergey Mel-
nik, David Mwaura, David Nagle, Sean Quinlan, Rajesh
Rao, Lindsay Rolig, Y asushi Saito, Michal Szymaniak,
Christopher Taylor, Ruth Wang, and Dale Woodford.
Spanner: Google’s Globally-Distributed Database. In
10th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 12) , Hollywood, CA, 2012.
[18] Jeffrey Dean. Challenges in building large-scale infor-
mation retrieval systems: invited talk. In WSDM ’09:
Proceedings of the Second ACM International Confer-
ence on Web Search and Data Mining , pages 1–1, New
Y ork, NY , USA, 2009.
[19] Dave Dice, Tim Harris, Alex Kogan, and Y ossi Lev. The
Inﬂuence of Malloc Placement on TSX Hardware Trans-
actional Memory. CoRR, abs/1504.04640, 2015.
[20] Jason Evans. A scalable concurrent malloc (3) imple-
mentation for FreeBSD. In Proceedings of the BSDCan
Conference, 2006.
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    271

--- PAGE 17 ---
[21] T. B. Ferreira, R. Matias, A. Macedo, and L. B. Araujo.
An Experimental Study on Memory Allocators in Mul-
ticore and Multithreaded Applications. In 2011 12th
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed
Computing, Applications and Technologies, pages 92–
98, 2011.
[22] M. Jägemar. Mallocpool: Improving Memory Perfor-
mance Through Contiguously TLB Mapped Memory. In
2018 IEEE 23rd International Conference on Emerging
Technologies and Factory Automation (ETF A), volume 1,
pages 1127–1130, 2018.
[23] Svilen Kanev, Juan Darago, Kim Hazelwood,
Parthasarathy Ranganathan, Tipp Moseley, Gu-Y eon
Wei, and David Brooks. Proﬁling a warehouse-scale
computer. In ISCA ’15 Proceedings of the 42nd Annual
International Symposium on Computer Architecture ,
pages 158–169, 2014.
[24] Svilen Kanev, Sam Likun Xi, Gu-Y eon Wei, and David
Brooks. Mallacc: Accelerating Memory Allocation.
SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News , 45(1):33–45, April
2017.
[25] Bradley C. Kuszmaul. Supermalloc: A Super Fast Mul-
tithreaded Malloc for 64-Bit Machines. SIGPLAN Not.,
50(11):41–55, June 2015.
[26] Y oungjin Kwon, Hangchen Y u, Simon Peter, Christo-
pher J. Rossbach, and Emmett Witchel. Coordinated
and Efﬁcient Huge Page Management with Ingens. In
Proceedings of the 12th USENIX Conference on Operat-
ing Systems Design and Implementation, OSDI’16, page
705–721, USA, 2016. USENIX Association.
[27] Andres Lagar-Cavilla, Junwhan Ahn, Suleiman Souhlal,
Neha Agarwal, Radoslaw Burny, Shakeel Butt, Jichuan
Chang, Ashwin Chaugule, Nan Deng, Junaid Shahid,
Greg Thelen, Kamil Adam Y urtsever, Y u Zhao, and
Parthasarathy Ranganathan. Software-Deﬁned Far Mem-
ory in Warehouse-Scale Computers. In Proceedings of
the Twenty-F ourth International Conference on Archi-
tectural Support for Programming Languages and Oper-
ating Systems, ASPLOS ’19, page 317–330, New Y ork,
NY , USA, 2019. Association for Computing Machinery.
[28] Jaekyu Lee, Hyesoon Kim, and Richard Vuduc. When
Prefetching Works, When It Doesn’t, and Why. ACM
Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization -
TACO, 9:1–29, 03 2012.
[29] Daan Leijen, Ben Zorn, and Leonardo de Moura. Mi-
malloc: Free List Sharding in Action. Technical Report
MSR-TR-2019-18, Microsoft, June 2019.
[30] Martin Maas, David G. Andersen, Michael Isard, Mo-
hammad Mahdi Javanmard, Kathryn S. McKinley, and
Colin Raffel. Learning-based Memory Allocation for
C++ Server Workloads. In 25th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) , 2020.
[31] Martin Maas, Chris Kennelly, Khanh Nguyen, Darryl
Gove, Kathryn S. McKinley, and Paul Turner. Adaptive
huge-page subrelease for non-moving memory alloca-
tors in warehouse-scale computers. In Proceedings
of the 2021 ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium
on Memory Management, ISMM 2021, New Y ork, NY ,
USA, 2021. Association for Computing Machinery.
[32] Ashish Panwar, Sorav Bansal, and K. Gopinath. Hawk-
Eye: Efﬁcient Fine-Grained OS Support for Huge Pages.
In Proceedings of the Twenty-F ourth International Con-
ference on Architectural Support for Programming Lan-
guages and Operating Systems , ASPLOS ’19, page
347–360, New Y ork, NY , USA, 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[33] Binh Pham, Viswanathan V aidyanathan, Aamer Jaleel,
and Abhishek Bhattacharjee. CoLT: Coalesced Large-
Reach TLBs. In Proceedings of the 2012 45th Annual
IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchi-
tecture, MICRO-45, page 258–269, USA, 2012. IEEE
Computer Society.
[34] Bobby Powers, David Tench, Emery D. Berger, and An-
drew McGregor. Mesh: Compacting Memory Manage-
ment for C/C++ Applications. In Proceedings of the
40th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Lan-
guage Design and Implementation , PLDI 2019, page
333–346, New Y ork, NY , USA, 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery.
[35] Gang Ren, Eric Tune, Tipp Moseley, Yixin Shi, Silvius
Rus, and Robert Hundt. Google-Wide Proﬁling: A Con-
tinuous Proﬁling Infrastructure for Data Centers. IEEE
Micro, pages 65–79, 2010.
[36] John Robson. Worst Case Fragmentation of First Fit
and Best Fit Storage Allocation Strategies. Comput. J.,
20:242–244, 08 1977.
[37] Joe Savage and Timothy M. Jones. HALO: Post-Link
Heap-Layout Optimisation. In Proceedings of the 18th
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Code Genera-
tion and Optimization, CGO 2020, page 94–106, New
Y ork, NY , USA, 2020. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery.
[38] T. Savor, M. Douglas, M. Gentili, L. Williams, K. Beck,
and M. Stumm. Continuous Deployment at Facebook
and OANDA. In 2016 IEEE/ACM 38th International
272    15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation USENIX Association

--- PAGE 18 ---
Conference on Software Engineering Companion (ICSE-
C), pages 21–30, 2016.
[39] Scott Schneider, Christos D. Antonopoulos, and Dim-
itrios S. Nikolopoulos. Scalable Locality-Conscious
Multithreaded Memory Allocation. In Proceedings of
the 5th International Symposium on Memory Manage-
ment, ISMM ’06, page 84–94, New Y ork, NY , USA,
2006. Association for Computing Machinery.
[40] Raimund Seidel and Cecilia R Aragon. Randomized
search trees. Algorithmica, 16(4-5):464–497, 1996.
[41] Akshitha Sriraman and Abhishek Dhanotia. Accelerom-
eter: Understanding Acceleration Opportunities for Data
Center Overheads at Hyperscale. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, ASPLOS ’20, page 733–750, New Y ork, NY ,
USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[42] Redis Team. Redis 6.0.9 and 5.0.10 are out.
[43]
Abhishek V erma, Luis Pedrosa, Madhukar R. Korupolu,
David Oppenheimer, Eric Tune, and John Wilkes. Large-
scale cluster management at Google with Borg. In Pro-
ceedings of the European Conference on Computer Sys-
tems (EuroSys), Bordeaux, France, 2015.
[44] Wm. A. Wulf and Sally A. McKee. Hitting the Memory
Wall: Implications of the Obvious. SIGARCH Comput.
Archit. News, 23(1):20–24, March 1995.
USENIX Association 15th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation    273
